<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
<title>Decomposition</title>
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/styles.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>

<main>
<p>2 <a href="fundamental.xhtml" class="nav-link">Fundamental</a>&#160;&#8593;</p><h3 id="decomposition">No. 9 &#8211; Decomposition</h3>
<p>Large and complex things should be broken down into smaller, more manageable things. This can be done progressively, and recursively, at multiple levels. </p>

<p>It&#8217;s best if the number of things in each group is somewhere in the range of 3 - 15, with 7 being a sweet spot. The human brain seems fairly good at dealing with sets of this size. </p>

<p>This idea can be applied to system functionality, to software architectures, to work statements (where it results in a <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Work_breakdown_structure" class="reflink" target="ref">work breakdown structure</a>), and to project staffing. </p>

<p>Decomposition is particularly powerful when done in conjunction with <a href="cohesion.xhtml" class="wiki-link">Cohesion</a> and <a href="loose-coupling.xhtml" class="wiki-link">Loose Coupling</a>. </p>

<p>One famous example of decomposition was performed by the <a href="http://www.nytimes.com/2003/12/09/news/earliest-days-takeoff-how-the-wright-brothers-did-what-no-one-else-could.html?pagewanted=all" class="reflink" target="ref">Wright Brothers</a> when they broke down the problem of human flight into three separate domains: lift, control and propulsion. </p>

<p>Another common example of decomposition in modern web applications is evident in the popular <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Model–view–controller" class="reflink" target="ref">MVC</a> pattern, in which application logic is subdivided into three separate areas: model, view and controller. </p>

<p>In Agile, it is common to have three levels of requirements decomposition, starting with <a href="http://www.scaledagileframework.com/epic/" class="reflink" target="ref">epics</a>, proceeding to <a href="https://www.symphonious.net/2006/05/18/features-vs-stories/" class="reflink" target="ref">features</a>, and then to <a href="https://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/agile/user-stories" class="reflink" target="ref">user stories</a>. </p>

<p>Note, however, that detailed decomposition of requirements need not be done initially, and can often be profitably deferred until a feature is a high enough priority to be approaching scheduled implementation into code. </p>

<hr />

<h5 id="words-from-others-on-this-topic">Words from Others on this Topic</h5>

<figure class="notenik-quote-attrib"><blockquote><p>The bulleted list of requirements is by far the most cost-effective and beneficial approach. It is simple to create; it is simple to read, regardless of background; and, when stored in a spreadsheet, database, or requirements management tool and augmented with annotations, it has incredible benefits to project management. </p></blockquote><figcaption><p>&#8211; <a href="davis-alan-m..xhtml" class="wiki-link">Alan M. Davis</a>, <em><a href="just-enough-requirements-management-where-software-development-meets-marketing.xhtml" class="wiki-link">Just Enough Requirements Management: Where Software Development Meets Marketing</a></em>, 2005 </p></figcaption></figure>


<hr />
<p>Next: <a href="cohesion.xhtml" class="nav-link">Cohesion</a></p>

</main>
</body>
</html>
