<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
<title>Managers should know what's going on</title>
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/styles.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>

<main>
<p>12.73.1 <a href="the-toyota-product-development-system-integrating-people-process-and-technology.xhtml" class="nav-link">The Toyota Product Development System: Integrating People, Process and Technology</a>&#160;&#8593;</p><h5 id="managers-should-know-whats-going-on">Managers should know what's going on</h5>
<blockquote>
<p>Unfortunately, many modern-day engineering managers believe their role in an organization is to attend meetings, keep abreast of the latest organizational policies, make the tough decisions about the big problems in the company, and generally look upward and outward. The philosophy seems to be that a good manager is good at delegating, and good engineers should work autonomously. </p>

<p>In the United States, &#8216;nosing around&#8217; is being a busy body. It is a form of micromanagement. An effective manager should delegate and then stay out of the engineer&#8217;s way. For a Toyota manager, this is abdicating responsibility. How can you consult and advise if you do not know what is going on? If you have no more information about what is going on across the organization than any other engineer, then what is your value? </p>
</blockquote>


<hr />
<p>Next: <a href="a-visceral-lesson-in-what-is-important.xhtml" class="nav-link">A visceral lesson in what is important</a></p>

</main>
</body>
</html>
