<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
<title>People who often change their minds</title>
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/styles.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>

<main>
<h5 id="people-who-often-change-their-minds">People who often change their minds</h5>
<blockquote>
<p>He [Jeff Bezos] said people who were right a lot of the time <em>were people who often changed their minds</em>. He doesn&#8217;t think consistency of thought is a particularly positive trait. It&#8217;s perfectly healthy &#8212; encouraged, even &#8212; to have an idea tomorrow that contradicted your idea today. </p> </p>

<p>He&#8217;s observed that the smartest people are constantly revising their understanding, reconsidering a problem they thought they&#8217;d already solved. They&#8217;re open to new points of view, new information, new ideas, contradictions, and challenges to their own way of thinking. </p> </p>

<p>This doesn&#8217;t mean you shouldn&#8217;t have a well formed point of view, but it means you should consider your point of view as temporary. </p> </p>

<p>What trait signified someone who was <em>wrong</em> a lot of the time? Someone obsessed with details that only support one point of view. If someone can&#8217;t climb out of the details, and see the bigger picture from multiple angles, they&#8217;re often wrong most of the time. </p>
</blockquote>
<p>&#8211; <a href="fried-jason.xhtml" class="wiki-link">Jason Fried</a>, &#8220;<a href="some-advice-from-jeff-bezos-signal-vs-noise.xhtml" class="wiki-link">Some advice from Jeff Bezos: Signal vs. Noise</a>&#8221;, 2018 </p>

</main>
</body>
</html>
